= ipfs-gate operator walkthrough =

This is a noob-friendly guide to standing up your own ipfs-gate server. It assumes you can SSH into a Linux box and follow recipes — no programming background needed.

> '''Status:''' v1 claim-model build. Working software but expect rough edges. Bugs found during real deployment get folded back into the [[#Common problems|Common Problems]] section below. Walkthrough last re-verified end-to-end on a fresh Vultr VPS (Ubuntu 24.04.4, 2GB RAM) on 2026-07-02 — every step below was executed as written unless noted.

> '''Reference OS:''' Ubuntu Server 24.04 LTS (Noble). The recipes are tested on this OS specifically. Other distros (Ubuntu 22.04, Debian 12, etc.) will likely work but might have subtle differences. For reproducibility, stick to '''Ubuntu 24.04 LTS''' on a fresh VPS.

> '''Reference user:''' This guide assumes you SSH in as <code>root</code> on a fresh VPS (the default for most providers — Vultr, Hetzner, Linode, DigitalOcean, etc.). If you operate as a non-root user with sudo, swap <code>sudo</code> in where shown.

== What you are setting up ==

A server that:
* Accepts file uploads from web browsers
* Charges users in CNOOBS (a Hive-Engine token) for hosting — priced per MB-hour under the v1 claim model (size × time × copies, quoted at reserve time)
* Stores the files on IPFS (the InterPlanetary File System — a peer-to-peer storage network)
* Hands users back a "CID" (a fingerprint of their file) that they share with whoever they want to give the file to
* Auto-deletes files when their claim expires (default 7 days / 168 hours; duration is user-selectable per upload)

You don't need to know how IPFS works internally. ipfs-gate sits in front of it, charges money, and unpins old files automatically.

== What you need before starting ==

# A '''fresh Ubuntu 24.04 LTS VPS''' with at least:
#* '''2 CPU cores''', '''2GB RAM''', '''20GB disk''' (more disk = more pinning capacity)
#* A '''public IP address''' and the ability to open ports 80 + 443
# A '''domain name''' you control (e.g. <code>ipfs.v4call.com</code>). It must point at your VPS's IP via an A record. Set this up at your DNS provider '''before''' starting — Let's Encrypt needs the domain to resolve.
# A '''dedicated Hive account''' for ipfs-gate (separate from any v4call account). [https://signup.hive.io Create one] if needed. Fund it with about '''2 HBD''' for refunds and Resource Credits.
# ''(Optional)'' The '''active private key''' for that Hive account (NOT the owner key, NOT the posting key — the active key). If you paste it into the server's <code>.env</code> the gate issues refunds automatically; leave it out and the gate still runs, with refunds queued for you to settle manually (see Step 3). Keep it secret.

If you don't have CNOOBS to test with, ask CompleteNoobs in v4call or contact via the Hive blockchain.

This guide installs everything on '''one VPS''' (kubo, ipfs-gate, nginx). For v0.1 scale this is fine; splitting onto separate boxes can come later.

== Step 1: Install Docker on Ubuntu 24.04 ==

SSH into the VPS as root:

<pre>
ssh root@your-vps-ip
</pre>

Update + install Docker (the official one-liner installer):

<pre>
apt update && apt upgrade -y
curl -fsSL https://get.docker.com | sh
</pre>

Verify:

<pre>
docker --version
docker compose version
</pre>

You should see Docker 27.x or newer and Docker Compose v2.x or newer.

''(If you'd rather operate as a non-root user, also run <code>usermod -aG docker your-user</code> then log out and back in. The rest of this guide uses root; adjust paths under <code>/root/...</code> to <code>/home/your-user/...</code> as needed.)''

== Step 2: Clone ipfs-gate + prepare data directories ==

We'll deploy from <code>/opt/IPFS-Gate</code> (a standard location for operator-managed services):

<pre>
cd /opt
git clone https://github.com/CompleteNoobs/IPFS-Gate.git
cd /opt/IPFS-Gate
</pre>

'''Critical permission step.''' The ipfs-gate container runs as UID 1000 (the <code>node</code> user inside the container). Because we're running docker as root, the host data directories get created owned by root, and the container can't write to them. Pre-create them and chown:

<pre>
mkdir -p data/kubo data/ipfs-gate data/letsencrypt data/letsencrypt-webroot
chown -R 1000:1000 data/
</pre>

Skipping this leads to <code>SQLITE_CANTOPEN</code> errors in the ipfs-gate logs (see [[#Common problems|Common Problems]] #2).

== Step 3: Configure .env ==

<pre>
cp .env.example .env
nano .env
</pre>

Fill in at minimum:

* <code>IPFS_GATE_HIVE_ACCOUNT</code> — your dedicated Hive account name (e.g. <code>v4call-ipfs</code>). The only field the server hard-refuses to boot without.
* <code>ADMIN_KEY</code> — pick a long random string. Generate one with <code>openssl rand -hex 32</code> from another terminal. (Ships as <code>change-me-to-something-random</code> — change it.)
* <code>PUBLIC_GATEWAY_BASE</code> — <code>https://ipfs.your-domain.com</code> (your real domain). Required in production: without it, clients receive <code>https://ipfs.localhost</code> gateway links that download nothing (Common Problems #14).

Optional but recommended:

* <code>IPFS_GATE_ACTIVE_KEY</code> — the account's active private key (starts with <code>5...</code>). '''Key-optional since the v1 build:''' leave it blank and the gate still boots — refunds are recorded as <code>pending</code> in the refund ledger and you settle them manually (transfer + <code>/admin/log-refund</code>). The boot log confirms the mode with <code>refunds: MANUAL — IPFS_GATE_ACTIVE_KEY unset</code>. Set the key to enable automatic on-chain refunds. You can add it later: edit <code>.env</code>, then <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d</code> (Common Problems #4).

Sensible defaults to leave alone:

* <code>BIND_HOST=0.0.0.0</code> — required for docker; do '''not''' change to 127.0.0.1
* <code>DISK_LIMIT_GB=5</code> — increase as your VPS allows
* <code>DEFAULT_TTL_DAYS=7</code> — accepts fractions for testing (e.g. <code>0.001</code> ≈ 1.4 min)
* <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB=10</code> — per-upload cap
* <code>KUBO_DHT_MODE=none</code> — private hosting; CID only servable from your own gateway. Set to <code>client</code> for public IPFS network availability
* v1 pricing knobs (<code>PRICE_RATE_PER_MB_HOUR=1</code>, <code>PRICE_MIN_HOURS=1</code>, <code>NODE_COUNT=1</code>, …) — the shipped rate is a TEST-token placeholder, not a tuned price. Read <code>PRICING-V1-DESIGN-NOTES.md</code> before charging a token with real value. For scale: 1 CNOOBS/MB-hour means a 2MB file for the default 168h quotes at 336 CNOOBS.

Save and exit (Ctrl-X, Y, Enter in nano).

== Step 4: Edit nginx config for your domain ==

<pre>
nano nginx/ipfs-gate.conf
</pre>

Replace '''every instance''' of <code>ipfs.example.com</code> with your actual domain (e.g. <code>ipfs.v4call.com</code>).

Leave the HTTPS server block '''commented out''' for now — we'll enable it after the cert is in place in Step 6.

== Step 5: Boot HTTP-only and get an SSL cert ==

Bring up the stack with HTTP only:

<pre>
docker compose up -d
</pre>

The first run builds the ipfs-gate image and pulls kubo + nginx — expect '''several minutes''' on a small VPS. If your SSH session drops mid-build (broken pipe), don't panic: the build continues server-side. Reconnect and run <code>docker compose ps</code> — you'll likely find everything already up. (Confirmed during the 2026-07-02 re-verification: the SSH session died during the build; the stack was healthy on reconnect.)

Wait ~30 seconds for Kubo's first-boot identity generation. Then verify:

<pre>
docker compose ps
docker compose logs ipfs-gate | tail -20
</pre>

You should see lines like:

<pre>
[quota] applied migration 001_initial.sql
[quota] applied migration 002_uploads_tab.sql
[quota] applied migration 003_claims.sql
[quota] applied migration 004_release_consents.sql
[quota] applied migration 005_receipts.sql
[quota] schema_version = 5
[server] kubo backend OK, version 0.42.0, used <N> bytes
[sweeper] starting, interval = 60000ms
ipfs-gate v1 (claim model) listening on 0.0.0.0:3001
  operator account: @your-hive-account
  pricing: 1 CNOOBS / MB-hour, min 1h, 1 node(s), ≤10MB
  refunds: MANUAL — IPFS_GATE_ACTIVE_KEY unset, refunds recorded pending
  CORS origin: *
</pre>

(Exact version numbers drift; the <code>refunds: MANUAL</code> line only appears when you left <code>IPFS_GATE_ACTIVE_KEY</code> blank. The migration lines only print on first boot.)

If you see <code>listening on 127.0.0.1:3001</code> instead, your <code>.env</code> has the old BIND_HOST. Fix it (Common Problems #6) before proceeding — the cert step needs HTTP serving to work.

'''Don't try to verify with <code>curl http://your-domain/</code> at this stage.''' The shipped nginx config already 301-redirects all HTTP traffic (except the Let's Encrypt challenge path) to HTTPS — which doesn't exist until Step 6. A 301 pointing at a dead HTTPS URL is normal here, not a failure. Verify via the container logs above; certbot works regardless because <code>/.well-known/acme-challenge/</code> is exempt from the redirect.

Now request the cert from Let's Encrypt:

<pre>
# Replace ipfs.your-domain.com with your actual domain in both places below.
docker run --rm -it \
  -v "$PWD/data/letsencrypt:/etc/letsencrypt" \
  -v "$PWD/data/letsencrypt-webroot:/var/www/certbot" \
  --entrypoint certbot \
  certbot/certbot \
  certonly --webroot --webroot-path=/var/www/certbot \
  -d ipfs.your-domain.com \
  --email you@your-domain.com --agree-tos --no-eff-email
</pre>

On success: <code>Successfully received certificate.</code> The cert files land in <code>data/letsencrypt/live/ipfs.your-domain.com/</code>.

''(Running this from a script or non-interactive session? Drop the <code>-it</code> flags — the command needs no TTY and <code>docker run -it</code> errors without one. Verified 2026-07-02.)''

If this fails with a DNS error, double-check that your domain's A record actually points at this VPS's IP (try <code>dig ipfs.your-domain.com</code> from a different machine).

== Step 6: Enable HTTPS ==

<pre>
nano nginx/ipfs-gate.conf
</pre>

Uncomment the entire <code>server { listen 443 ssl; ... }</code> block. Make sure every <code>ipfs.example.com</code> in that block is also replaced with your domain (it should already match what you set in Step 4).

Reload nginx:

<pre>
docker compose restart nginx
docker compose logs nginx | tail -10
</pre>

== Step 7: Verify it's working ==

From your laptop (NOT the VPS):

<pre>
curl https://ipfs.your-domain.com/
</pre>

Expected JSON response (v1 claim model — there is no flat <code>amount</code> any more; cost is quoted per upload at <code>/reserve</code>):

<pre>
{"service":"ipfs-gate","version":"1.0.0-dev","operator":"your-hive-account",
 "payment":{"model":"claim-mb-hour","currency":"CNOOBS","max_size_mb":10,"default_hours":168,"ttl_days":7},
 "pricing":{"rate_per_mb_hour":1,"min_hours":1,"mb_divisor":1000000,"node_count":1,"copies_max":1,"replication_leeway":2},
 "features":{"public_uploads":true,"uploads_tab":true,"claim_model":true}}
</pre>

Optional deeper smoke test — ask for a quote (no payment involved; the reservation self-expires after 5 minutes):

<pre>
curl -s -X POST -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"uploader":"your-hive-account","size_bytes":2000000}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/reserve
</pre>

You should get back a <code>reservation_id</code>, a <code>payment</code> block with the memo to use, and a <code>quote</code> (2MB × 168h × 1 copy = 336 at the placeholder rate).

Test the admin endpoint too (substitute your real ADMIN_KEY):

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/stats
</pre>

You should see a JSON response with disk, pin, payment, moderation, and kubo stats.

'''Note:''' an HTTP request (<code>http://...</code>) returns a 301 redirect to HTTPS. That's expected — nginx forces HTTPS for all real traffic. Use <code>curl -L</code> to follow the redirect or hit <code>https://</code> directly.

=== The landing page ===

Open <code>https://ipfs.your-domain.com/</code> in a '''browser''' and you get the standalone landing page (<code>public/index.html</code>) instead of the JSON — same URL, different <code>Accept</code> header. The page is a self-contained client for your gate: log in with a Hive account (Keychain or posting key), then

* '''My Uploads''' — list and delete/unpin your files (same signed-request API v4call's Uploads → IPFS-Gate tab uses)
* '''Private Send''' — encrypt a file in-browser to chosen Hive accounts, pay the gate, get a <code>v4reveal:</code> link
* '''Public Upload''' — plaintext upload → shareable gateway link
* '''Reveal''' — paste a <code>v4reveal:</code> link and decrypt it (links are interchangeable with v4call's Private Send / Reveal tabs)

No configuration needed — the page talks to the gate it's served from by default. Payments always need the Hive Keychain browser extension (they're Active-key token transfers). If you see JSON in the browser instead of the page, your nginx config predates the <code>map $http_accept</code> block — re-copy <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code> from the repo (Step 4/6) and restart nginx.

== Step 8: Schedule cert renewal ==

Let's Encrypt certs expire after 90 days. Add a cron job for root:

<pre>
crontab -e
</pre>

Add this single line (adjust nothing — uses <code>/opt/IPFS-Gate</code> from this walkthrough):

<pre>
0 3 * * 1 cd /opt/IPFS-Gate && docker run --rm -v "$PWD/data/letsencrypt:/etc/letsencrypt" -v "$PWD/data/letsencrypt-webroot:/var/www/certbot" --entrypoint certbot certbot/certbot renew --quiet && docker compose restart nginx
</pre>

Runs every Monday at 03:00 UTC. Certbot only actually renews when within 30 days of expiry — earlier runs are no-ops.

== Updating to a new version ==

'''Recommended: <code>scripts/ipfs-update.sh</code>.''' Does steps 1–6 below for you, plus safety this manual recipe doesn't have: it validates the restored nginx config against the live container mounts ''before'' touching any running container, refuses to run if unexpected local changes exist outside <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code>, locks against a second overlapping invocation, and no-ops cleanly if already up to date. Install once, then re-run any time:
<pre>
cp /opt/IPFS-Gate/scripts/ipfs-update.sh /usr/local/bin/ipfs-update.sh
chmod +x /usr/local/bin/ipfs-update.sh
/usr/local/bin/ipfs-update.sh
</pre>
Written after the incident below (Common Problems #422) where a bare hard reset took the site down.

Manual recipe (what the script automates):
<pre>
IPFS_GATE_DIR=/opt/IPFS-Gate
cd "$IPFS_GATE_DIR"

# 1. Back up your config + data BEFORE pulling
cp .env .env.bk-$(date +%Y%m%d)
cp -r data data.bk-$(date +%Y%m%d)
cp nginx/ipfs-gate.conf nginx/ipfs-gate.conf.bk-$(date +%Y%m%d)

# 2. Pull latest code (this WILL clobber .env and nginx/ipfs-gate.conf if you've edited them)
git fetch --all && git reset --hard origin/main

# 3. Restore your operator-specific files
cp .env.bk-$(date +%Y%m%d) .env
cp nginx/ipfs-gate.conf.bk-$(date +%Y%m%d) nginx/ipfs-gate.conf

# 4. Re-apply data ownership (in case new directories appeared)
chown -R 1000:1000 data/

# 5. Rebuild and restart (env-change or code-change BOTH need down/up, not restart)
docker compose down
docker compose build --no-cache
docker compose up -d

# 6. Watch logs to confirm clean start
docker compose logs -f ipfs-gate
</pre>

'''Always back up <code>.env</code>, <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code>, and the <code>data/</code> directory before any update.''' A <code>git reset --hard</code> will wipe any operator-edited files in the repo.

== Admin tasks ==

All admin endpoints need <code>Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY</code> from your <code>.env</code>.

=== See server stats ===

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/stats
</pre>

Shows disk usage, pin counts, payment counts, recent moderation actions, Kubo health.

=== List a user's uploads ===

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' \
  "https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/uploads?account=guest33"
</pre>

=== Ban an account ===

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"hive_account":"badguy","reason":"Spam","refund_policy":"none"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/ban
</pre>

<code>refund_policy</code> can be <code>"none"</code> (default — banned user forfeits unused TTL) or <code>"prorata"</code> (calculate per-pin remaining-time refund; '''v0.1 records this intent but does NOT auto-issue the on-chain refund'''. The operator must transfer manually and then <code>/admin/log-refund</code>).

=== Unban an account ===

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"hive_account":"badguy"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/unban
</pre>

Note: unban does NOT restore content that was unpinned. The user must re-upload + re-pay.

=== Take down a specific CID ===

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"cid":"bafkreig...","reason":"DMCA #12345"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/takedown
</pre>

Adds the CID to the blocklist (can never be re-uploaded) and unpins from Kubo immediately.

=== Export the takedown list (for backup or peer sharing) ===

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/takedowns > takedowns.json
</pre>

=== Import a takedown list ===

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"takedowns":[{"cid":"bafk1...","reason":"From peer X"}]}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/takedowns/import
</pre>

=== View the audit log ===

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' \
  "https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/moderation/log?limit=50"
</pre>

Append-only record of every moderation action with admin attribution and timestamps.

=== Orphan payments (manual refund needed) ===

If a user paid in wrong currency, wrong amount, or the Hive-Engine sidechain hadn't confirmed the transfer at upload time, the payment ends up in the orphan list:

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/orphan-payments
</pre>

Operator reviews, decides whether to manually refund (out-of-band Hive transfer), and logs the action:

<pre>
# After manually transferring back to the user on Hive:
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"payment_id":88,"refund_tx_id":"ef56gh78...","reason":"Wrong amount"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/log-refund
</pre>

== Optional: Private / family hosting (whitelist mode) ==

Everything above builds an open, pay-to-use gate. '''Whitelist mode''' flips that: only Hive accounts you explicitly invite can use the server at all, and invited accounts can be made free (no token payment) — the shape you want for a "family server." One knob, three configurations:

* '''Whitelist-only, free-for-all''' — every invited account is <code>fee_exempt</code>. Nobody pays; only invited accounts can upload at all.
* '''Admin-free + guest quotas''' — invited guests pay nothing but each gets a hard per-account storage cap via <code>quota_bytes</code>.
* '''Paid-but-still-whitelisted''' — invited accounts still pay the normal per-MB-hour rate; whitelisting is just a second gate on top (e.g. "only people I've actually met can use my public gate").

Live-tested end-to-end on <code>ipfs.v4call.com</code> on 2026-07-05 — every example below is a copy of a real, working test run against the production server, not a hypothetical.

=== Turning it on ===

Edit <code>.env</code>:

<pre>
WHITELIST_MODE=true
SERVER_ADMIN_HIVE_ACCOUNTS=
</pre>

<code>SERVER_ADMIN_HIVE_ACCOUNTS</code> is optional — a comma-separated list of Hive accounts (lowercase, no <code>@</code>) that get a second, narrower admin tier authenticated by a Hive-signed request instead of your <code>ADMIN_KEY</code> (useful if you want a trusted family member to manage the guest list without handing them your box's admin password). Leave it blank if you, the box owner, will be the only admin — <code>ADMIN_KEY</code> alone already covers every <code>/admin/*</code> route including whitelist management.

Recreate the container so the env change takes effect (a plain <code>restart</code> does NOT pick up <code>.env</code> changes — Common Problems #4):

<pre>
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
</pre>

Confirm it's live:

<pre>
curl -s https://ipfs.your-domain.com/ | grep whitelist_mode
</pre>

You should see <code>"whitelist_mode":true</code> inside the <code>features</code> block. '''With <code>WHITELIST_MODE=false</code> (the default), behavior is byte-for-byte identical to the open gate described earlier in this guide — this mode is entirely opt-in.'''

=== Inviting an account ===

Add each friend/family Hive username with <code>POST /admin/whitelist/add</code> (Bearer <code>ADMIN_KEY</code>, same auth as every other <code>/admin/*</code> route):

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"target_account":"guest33","fee_exempt":true,"note":"family"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/whitelist/add
</pre>

Fields:

* <code>target_account</code> — required, the Hive username to invite.
* <code>fee_exempt</code> — optional, default <code>false</code>. <code>true</code> means this account uploads at $0 (the quote still shows the real numbers, just zeroed out — never a silent free ride the account can't explain).
* <code>quota_bytes</code> — optional, default unlimited. A hard per-account storage cap, '''on top of''' (never instead of) your server's overall <code>DISK_LIMIT_GB</code>. Whichever cap is tighter wins.
* <code>note</code> — optional, freeform (e.g. <code>"cousin's laptop"</code>).

List who's currently whitelisted:

<pre>
curl -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/whitelist
</pre>

Remove someone (soft-delete — blocks their '''new''' reservations only; anything already pinned for them keeps running until it naturally expires, or you ban/take it down separately):

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"target_account":"guest33"}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/whitelist/remove
</pre>

=== What a non-invited stranger sees ===

Anyone not on the list gets a clean rejection right at the quote stage, before any file bytes move:

<pre>
$ curl -s -X POST -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
    -d '{"uploader":"randomstranger999","size_bytes":1000000}' \
    https://ipfs.your-domain.com/reserve
{"error":"forbidden","message":"this server is invite-only — your account is not whitelisted","details":{}}
</pre>

=== What an invited, fee-exempt account sees ===

The quote at <code>/reserve</code> comes back honestly labeled — <code>total: 0</code> plus <code>fee_exempt: true</code>, never a silent free upload the client can't explain:

<pre>
"quote": { ... "rate_per_mb_hour": 0, "total": 0, "currency": "TEST", "fee_exempt": true }
</pre>

The follow-up <code>POST /upload</code> succeeds with no on-chain payment step at all — no Hive Keychain popup, no <code>tx_id</code>. The landing page's upload tabs (and v4call's ipfs-gate tab) show a "Free (fee-exempt)" badge in place of a cost estimate for these accounts.

=== Paid-but-still-whitelisted accounts ===

Add someone with <code>fee_exempt</code> omitted (or explicitly <code>false</code>) and the whitelist becomes a pure access gate — they still pay the normal per-MB-hour rate:

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"target_account":"cnoobz","fee_exempt":false}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/whitelist/add
</pre>

<code>/reserve</code> now returns a real non-zero <code>total</code>, and <code>/upload</code> still rejects with <code>400 {"error":"bad_request","message":"tx_id required"}</code> until a genuine Hive-Engine payment is presented — confirmed live. Useful for "only people I actually know may use this gate at all, but everyone still pays."

=== Per-account quota caps ===

Set <code>quota_bytes</code> when inviting someone if you want a hard ceiling per guest (e.g. "cousin gets 500MB, no more"):

<pre>
curl -X POST -H 'Authorization: Bearer YOUR_ADMIN_KEY' -H 'Content-Type: application/json' \
  -d '{"target_account":"guest33","fee_exempt":true,"quota_bytes":524288000}' \
  https://ipfs.your-domain.com/admin/whitelist/add
</pre>

Once their pending reservations + active pins hit the cap, further reservations fail with <code>507 insufficient_storage</code> naming the exact numbers over the cap — tested live, e.g. <code>"per-account quota exceeded (0 + 2000 > 1000 bytes)"</code>.

=== Security note: whitelist membership + on-chain key binding (fee-exempt path) ===

'''FIXED 2026-07-16 — this section now documents the hardened behavior; the historical gap is noted at the end.''' Whitelist mode gates on the '''Hive account name string''' supplied to <code>/reserve</code> and <code>/upload</code>. For a normal, paying upload the on-chain payment itself proves who's uploading — spending real CNOOBS/HBD from an account requires that account's real private key. For a '''fee-exempt''' whitelisted account there is no on-chain transaction, so <code>/upload</code> now performs the same key→account binding <code>/uploads/by-user</code> and the Hive-signed admin tier already do: the <code>uploader_pubkey</code> that signed <code>upload_proof_sig</code> '''must be a current posting key of the named Hive account''' (looked up live via <code>condenser_api.get_accounts</code>). Clients sign the upload proof with the posting key, so a legitimate upload passes unchanged; a throwaway keypair does not.

'''Behavior now (confirmed live 2026-07-16):'''
* A fee-exempt upload signed with the account's '''real''' posting key → succeeds and pins (no change for legitimate users).
* An upload claiming a fee-exempt account but signed with a '''throwaway''' keypair → rejected <code>401 {"error":"unauthorized","message":"uploader_pubkey is not a current posting key of this Hive account"}</code>.
* If Hive is unreachable at upload time the check '''fails closed''' → <code>422 unprocessable_entity</code> (an attacker can't bypass by DoSing the RPC path; a legitimate user retries when nodes recover).
* '''Whitelisted-but-paying''' accounts (<code>fee_exempt:false</code>) were never affected — spending that account's real CNOOBS already requires its real keys, verified on-chain. The new check is scoped to the fee-exempt branch only, so the paid path takes no extra Hive round-trip.

'''Defense-in-depth still worth keeping:'''
* Keep <code>DISK_LIMIT_GB</code> and per-account <code>quota_bytes</code> reasonable — good hygiene against a compromised-key or runaway-client scenario, even though the name-spoofing hole is closed.

'''Historical note (pre-2026-07-16):''' before this fix, nothing checked <code>uploader_pubkey</code> against the chain on the fee-exempt path, so anyone who knew a whitelisted account name could upload for free under it with a freshly-generated keypair (attributed to the innocent account). See <code>FEE-EXEMPT-UPLOAD-AUTH-HARDENING.md</code> for the full write-up. If you run an old binary, <code>git pull</code> + rebuild.

== Federation (deferred to v0.3+) ==

ipfs-gate is currently standalone. Each operator runs their own server with their own ban list, their own pricing, their own disk allocation. v0.3+ will add optional Nostr-based discovery and opt-in cross-operator banlist sharing — same architectural pattern as v4call's Nostr federation work.

== Common problems ==

''(This section grows as bugs are found and fixed during development. Ordered by first-boot likelihood.)''

# '''Q:''' I ran <code>docker compose up</code> and Kubo doesn't respond for the first ~30 seconds. Is it broken?
#: '''A:''' No. Kubo does a one-time identity generation on first boot. Takes 10–30s on a small VPS. Watch <code>docker compose logs kubo</code> to see when it's ready. The healthcheck in docker-compose.yml gates ipfs-gate startup on Kubo being healthy.
# '''Q:''' My ipfs-gate container won't start. I see one of:
#:* <code>EACCES: permission denied, mkdir '/app/data'</code>
#:* <code>SqliteError: unable to open database file</code> with <code>code: 'SQLITE_CANTOPEN'</code>
#:* Container in restart loop with errors mentioning <code>/app/data/ipfs-gate.db</code>
#: '''A:''' Same root cause: the container runs as UID 1000 (node user), but if you ran <code>docker compose up</code> as root, Docker created the host <code>./data/</code> directories owned by root. The container can't write there. Fix:
#:<pre>chown -R 1000:1000 ./data/
docker compose down && docker compose up -d
docker compose logs ipfs-gate | tail -20</pre>
#: Confirmed during the v0.1 first-VPS test (2026-05-24). The Dockerfile correctly <code>chown</code>s <code>/app/data</code> at build, but the host volume mount overlays that with the host's ownership, which wins. Step 2 of this walkthrough does the chown proactively to avoid hitting this.
# '''Q:''' Boot logs say <code>FATAL: IPFS_GATE_HIVE_ACCOUNT not set. Refusing to start.</code>
#: '''A:''' Your <code>.env</code> is missing or doesn't have <code>IPFS_GATE_HIVE_ACCOUNT</code>. Copy <code>.env.example</code> to <code>.env</code> and fill in the values (Step 3).
# '''Q:''' I changed something in <code>.env</code> and ran <code>docker compose restart ipfs-gate</code>, but the change didn't take effect (e.g. logs still show the old BIND_HOST or old TTL).
#: '''A:''' <code>docker compose restart</code> reuses the existing container (and the env vars baked in at create-time). To pick up <code>.env</code> changes you must recreate the container:
#:<pre># Either down + up (clean, also recreates the network):
docker compose down && docker compose up -d

# Or force-recreate just one service:
docker compose up -d --force-recreate ipfs-gate</pre>
#: This is parallel to v4call's "<code>docker compose down</code> required before rebuilding" gotcha — different cause (env change vs code change) but same surprise. Confirmed during v0.1 first-VPS test (2026-05-24).
# '''Q:''' My response JSON shows <code>"ttl_days":0</code> even though I set <code>DEFAULT_TTL_DAYS=0.001</code> for testing fast sweeper expiry. Or pins expire immediately.
#: '''A:''' Pre-v0.1.1 code used <code>parseInt</code> which truncated <code>0.001</code> to <code>0</code>. Fixed in v0.1.1: now uses <code>parseFloat</code>, so fractional days work. If you're on an old binary, <code>git pull</code> + rebuild. Reference: <code>0.001 day ≈ 1.44 minutes</code> — handy for testing the sweeper.
# '''Q:''' Nginx returns <code>502 Bad Gateway</code> when I curl my domain. The ipfs-gate container is running fine and logs show it's listening.
#: '''A:''' Your <code>.env</code> has <code>BIND_HOST=127.0.0.1</code>. That binds ipfs-gate to the container's loopback only, which is unreachable from the nginx container. For Docker deployment, set <code>BIND_HOST=0.0.0.0</code>. The container is still isolated by the docker network — only nginx can reach it from inside the stack; the public only sees ports 80/443 on nginx. The shipped <code>.env.example</code> defaults to <code>0.0.0.0</code> — but pre-existing <code>.env</code> files from earlier installs still need the manual edit, then a full <code>docker compose down && up -d</code> (Common Problems #4).
# '''Q:''' Uploads succeed but recipients see "file not found" when fetching from a public IPFS gateway (e.g. ipfs.io).
#: '''A:''' Check <code>KUBO_DHT_MODE</code> in your <code>.env</code>. If set to <code>none</code> (the v0.1 default), only your own ipfs-gate's gateway serves the file. Other public IPFS gateways won't know about it. This is intentional for privacy; switch to <code>client</code> if you want public-IPFS-network availability. Recipients fetching via <code>https://ipfs.your-domain.com/ipfs/&lt;cid&gt;</code> always work regardless of this setting.
# '''Q:''' Payment verification fails with <code>memo mismatch</code>.
#: '''A:''' The browser must send the exact memo string returned by <code>/reserve</code>. Format is <code>ipfs-gate:upload:&lt;16-hex-id&gt;</code>. If the client edited it, this will fail. The reservation_id in the memo also must match the URL parameter.
# '''Q:''' Upload returns <code>"payload.from undefined doesn't match sender &lt;username&gt;"</code> even though the CNOOBS transfer landed on-chain.
#: '''A:''' Pre-v0.1.2 had a redundant <code>payload.from</code> check in <code>hive-verify.js</code> that always failed: Hive-Engine's <code>tokens/transfer</code> contractPayload has no <code>from</code> field (the sender is implicit in the wrapping custom_json's <code>required_auths</code>, which <code>extractTokenTransferOp</code> already validates). Fixed in v0.1.2 by removing the check. If you're on an old binary, <code>git pull</code> + <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d --build</code>. Confirmed during v0.1 first-client integration test (2026-05-25).
# '''Q:''' Uploads "succeed" with a CID but the gateway returns <code>404 / "CID not pinned here"</code> a few minutes later (or even within seconds during testing).
#: '''A:''' Almost always <code>DEFAULT_TTL_DAYS</code> still set to a sweeper-test value like <code>0.001</code>. That's ~1.44 minutes; the sweeper unpins the file very fast. Check the live config:<pre>curl -s https://ipfs.your-domain.com/ | grep ttl_days</pre>If it's not your production value (default <code>7</code>), edit <code>.env</code>, then <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d</code> (env changes need recreate per Common Problems #4). Confirmed during v0.1 first-client integration test (2026-05-25) — sweeper-test TTL from earlier session lingered.
# '''Q:''' Upload returned 2xx with a CID even though my account didn't have enough CNOOBS to pay (so the Hive-Engine sidechain should have rejected the transfer).
#: '''A:''' Pre-v0.1.3 had a soft balance check: it compared the escrow's <em>current</em> balance to the claimed payment amount. Since the escrow's existing balance always exceeds a single payment, the check passed even when 0 actually landed — and the file got pinned for free. Fixed in v0.1.3: <code>/upload</code> now polls Hive-Engine's <code>getTransactionInfo</code> RPC (at <code>api.hive-engine.com/rpc/blockchain</code>) for an authoritative success/fail signal. If the sidechain rejected the transfer, the upload is now hard-rejected with the actual sidechain error message and the reservation is cancelled. If <code>git pull && docker compose up -d --build</code> doesn't fix, check container logs for <code>sidechain rejected tx ...</code> entries. Confirmed during the same 2026-05-25 session when a user with 0.9 CNOOBS triggered a "successful" upload that was actually unpaid.
# '''Q:''' I ran <code>git fetch --all && git reset --hard origin/main && docker compose ... --build && docker compose up -d</code> and now the HTTPS site is unreachable (port 443 connection refused; HTTP 80 still works).
#: '''A:''' <code>git reset --hard</code> clobbered your operator-specific <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code> (which had the real domain + cert path) back to the placeholder shipped in the repo. Nginx then can't load the cert, fails to bind 443, and the container restart-loops. <strong>Always back up nginx config before a hard reset.</strong> Working recipe:<pre>cp nginx/ipfs-gate.conf nginx/bk.ipfs-gate.conf       # one-time backup
git fetch --all && git reset --hard origin/main && \
docker compose down && docker compose build --no-cache && \
cp nginx/bk.ipfs-gate.conf nginx/ipfs-gate.conf && \
docker compose up -d</pre>If you've already lost the file: restore it from <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf.example</code> (or the wiki Step 4 instructions) — replace <code>v4call.com</code>/placeholder with your real domain. Same gotcha exists on v4call. Confirmed during 2026-05-25 testing.
# '''Q:''' I deleted a CID (admin takedown / expiry) but my browser still serves it from cache for hours.
#: '''A:''' The gateway sets <code>Cache-Control: public, max-age=86400</code> (1 day) on <code>/ipfs/:cid</code> responses by default. Browsers respect this and skip the network entirely until the cache expires. Use <code>/status/:cid</code> from <code>curl</code> or an incognito window to see the gate's real state. For dev/testing, lower the cache window by setting <code>GATEWAY_CACHE_MAX_AGE=3600</code> (1h) or even <code>60</code> (1min) in <code>.env</code>, then <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d</code> (env changes need recreate per Common Problems #4). Pin state in the DB is independent of browser cache — the sweeper expires pins on schedule regardless. Documented in v0.1.4.
# '''Q:''' Uploads work but the gateway URL in the client bubble shows <code>https://ipfs.localhost/ipfs/...</code> instead of my real domain.
#: '''A:''' You haven't set <code>PUBLIC_GATEWAY_BASE</code> in <code>.env</code>. The server falls back to <code>https://ipfs.localhost</code> when neither <code>PUBLIC_GATEWAY_BASE</code> nor <code>SERVER_DOMAIN</code> is set. Add this to your <code>.env</code>:<pre>PUBLIC_GATEWAY_BASE=https://ipfs.your-domain.com</pre>Then <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d</code> (env changes need recreate per Common Problems #4). v4call's client has a safety net that substitutes the user's chosen gateway URL when the server returns a localhost one, so end-users can still fetch — but new clients won't have that fallback, so fix at the source. Was missing from <code>.env.example</code> pre-v0.1.2; documented in v0.1.2.
# '''Q:''' Server logs say <code>kubo backend status: unreachable (fetch failed)</code>.
#: '''A:''' Kubo container isn't healthy yet, or the <code>KUBO_API_URL</code> in <code>.env</code> doesn't match the docker-compose service name. Default is <code>http://kubo:5001</code>; only change if you renamed the kubo service.
# '''Q:''' The cert renewal cron fires but nginx still serves the old cert.
#: '''A:''' Certbot writes new files but nginx doesn't auto-reload. The cron line in Step 8 includes <code>docker compose restart nginx</code> after renew — make sure you copied that part too.
# '''Q:''' Let's Encrypt certbot fails with "DNS problem" or "No A/AAAA record for host".
#: '''A:''' Your domain's A record isn't pointing at this VPS, or DNS hasn't propagated yet. Verify with <code>dig ipfs.your-domain.com</code> from any machine. If it returns the wrong IP, fix at your DNS provider and wait 5-10 minutes for propagation, then retry the certbot command from Step 5.
# '''Q:''' I set <code>WHITELIST_MODE=true</code> but reservations for '''my own''' Hive account (the operator) get rejected with <code>"this server is invite-only"</code>.
#: '''A:''' Turning on whitelist mode does not automatically whitelist the box owner or the <code>IPFS_GATE_HIVE_ACCOUNT</code> escrow account — it's a plain per-account gate with no built-in owner exception. Invite your own personal Hive account the same way you'd invite anyone else (see [[#Optional: Private / family hosting (whitelist mode)|Whitelist mode]] above): <code>POST /admin/whitelist/add</code> with your own username.
# '''Q:''' I flipped <code>WHITELIST_MODE=true</code> in <code>.env</code> but <code>curl https://.../</code> still shows <code>"whitelist_mode":false</code>.
#: '''A:''' Same env-reload gotcha as everywhere else in this file (Common Problems #4) — <code>docker compose restart</code> does not re-read <code>.env</code>. Run <code>docker compose down && docker compose up -d</code> to recreate the container with the new value.
# '''Q:''' I raised <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code> in <code>.env</code> (and recreated the containers — <code>curl https://.../</code> shows the new <code>max_size_mb</code>), small files upload fine, but a big file fails with <code>upload failed: 413</code> — '''after the payment was already taken.'''
#: '''A:''' There are TWO size caps and they must move together. <code>.env</code>'s <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code> is only the '''app's''' cap; nginx has its own <code>client_max_body_size</code> (shipped as <code>12M</code> to match the old 10MB default) in <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code>. Anything bigger is 413-rejected '''by nginx before the app ever sees the request''' — so the app can't refuse it pre-payment, and the payment isn't even recorded in the gate's DB (it won't show in <code>/admin/orphan-payments</code>; the tokens just sit in escrow — refund manually via Keychain if it wasn't your own account). Fix: edit <code>client_max_body_size</code> in <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code> to the app cap + slop (e.g. <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB=1000</code> → <code>client_max_body_size 1024M;</code>), then reload nginx:<pre>docker exec ipfs-gate-nginx nginx -t && docker exec ipfs-gate-nginx nginx -s reload</pre>(A conf edit only needs a reload, not a container recreate — the file is bind-mounted.) Since the fix that shipped alongside this wiki entry, <code>/reserve</code> also hard-rejects an over-'''app'''-cap <code>size_bytes</code> before handing out payment instructions, so the app-cap side can no longer eat a payment — but the nginx cap is invisible to the app, so keeping the two in sync is on the operator. Also mind RAM: uploads are buffered in memory, so a 1000MB cap means ~1GB RAM per concurrent large upload — a 2GB VPS will OOM on two at once. Confirmed on ipfs.v4call.com 2026-07-05 (125MB file, app cap 1000MB, nginx still 12M).
# '''Q:''' The upload page shows <code>⚠ Can't read this gate's upload limit — https://... isn't answering. Check the Gateway URL at the top, then retry.</code> (often right after a server reboot).
#: '''A:''' The client refuses to upload until it has fetched the gate's real size cap from <code>GET /</code> (JSON), and that fetch just failed. Work through these in order:
#:* '''Did the server just reboot?''' The stack takes ~30–60s to come back: Kubo does its startup dance first and the healthcheck gates ipfs-gate on it (Common Problems #1). Wait a minute and press the upload button again — <code>ensureGateCap()</code> re-fetches on every attempt, no page reload needed.
#:* '''Is the stack actually up?''' <code>ssh</code> in and run <code>docker compose ps</code> in the repo dir — all three containers (<code>ipfs-gate</code>, <code>ipfs-gate-kubo</code>, <code>ipfs-gate-nginx</code>) should be <code>Up</code>. If not: <code>docker compose up -d</code> and check <code>docker compose logs ipfs-gate | tail -20</code>.
#:* '''Does the info endpoint answer?''' From any machine:<pre>curl -s -H "Accept: application/json" https://ipfs.your-domain.com/</pre>If you get the JSON (with <code>max_size_mb</code>), the server is fine — the problem is client-side: check the Gateway URL box for a typo, stray whitespace, <code>http://</code> instead of <code>https://</code>, or a different domain than you think you're testing.
#:* '''Bonus gotcha — a reboot does NOT apply <code>.env</code> edits.''' If you edited <code>.env</code> (e.g. changed <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code>) and then rebooted the VPS expecting the change to land: it didn't. A reboot (like <code>docker compose restart</code>) brings back the '''same''' container with the old env baked in (Common Problems #4). Check what's really live with the curl above — if <code>max_size_mb</code> is the old value, run <code>docker compose up -d --force-recreate ipfs-gate</code>. Confirmed on ipfs.v4call.com 2026-07-12: <code>.env</code> had been set back to <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB=10</code> and the VPS rebooted for OS updates, but the gate still advertised <code>1000</code> until the container was recreated (the "isn't answering" message itself was the ~1-minute post-reboot startup window).
# '''Q:''' I want to raise <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code> to something big (500MB, 1GB). Small files work after the change, but files over ~100MB die with <code>⚠ upload failed (Failed to fetch)</code> — '''after payment'''. Is big-file hosting supported?
#: '''A:''' Not reliably yet — '''this is a known OPEN bug, and it is NOT the nginx 413 problem''' from the entry above. Read this before raising the cap:
#:* '''Two caps must move together''' (see the 413 entry above): <code>.env</code>'s <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code> '''and''' <code>client_max_body_size</code> in <code>nginx/ipfs-gate.conf</code>. If nginx is the blocker you get a clean <code>413</code>. If both caps are raised and the transfer still dies mid-flight with <code>Failed to fetch</code> (connection dropped, no HTTP status), you've hit the open bug.
#:* '''The open bug:''' confirmed on ipfs.v4call.com 2026-07-06 — 125MB public upload failed after payment; 30MB fine; the same big files upload fine to Pinata from the same browser, so the client side is not the problem. Full investigation state lives in <code>PICKUP-NOTES-2026-07-06.md</code> §2: ranked suspects are (1) node container '''OOM-kill''' — most likely, see next bullet, (2) nginx <code>proxy_read_timeout 120s</code> while the app does Hive verify + sidechain confirm + Kubo add after the body lands, (3) <code>KUBO_TIMEOUT_MS</code> (default 60s) aborting the Kubo add. Each leaves a different fingerprint — repro while running <code>docker stats</code> and tailing both containers' logs; check <code>docker inspect ipfs-gate --format '{{.State.OOMKilled}} {{.RestartCount}}'</code> and <code>dmesg -T | grep -i oom</code>.
#:* '''Mind your RAM regardless:''' <code>/upload</code> buffers the whole file in memory (multer memoryStorage), and the Kubo backend copies it '''again''' into a Blob — so one upload costs '''≥2× the file size in node heap'''. On a 2GB VPS (which also runs Kubo + nginx), a 1GB cap means a single large upload can OOM the container, and two concurrent ~500MB uploads will. The real fix is server-side '''streaming''' uploads (multer diskStorage/busboy → stream into Kubo) — a v0.2 backlog item, design thinking in <code>PICKUP-NOTES-2026-07-06.md</code> §3.
#:* '''Practical operator advice until streaming ships:''' keep <code>MAX_FILE_SIZE_MB</code> at a value your RAM can eat twice, concurrently — on a 2GB box that means staying in the low-hundreds of MB at most, and the well-tested territory is ≤100MB. Because the failure happens '''after''' payment, every crash near the cap is also a manual-refund chore (the tokens sit in escrow; nothing shows in <code>/admin/orphan-payments</code>).

== Resources ==

* '''Repo:''' https://github.com/CompleteNoobs/IPFS-Gate
* '''Sister project v4call:''' https://github.com/CompleteNoobs/v4call (first ipfs-gate client)
* '''Hive signup:''' https://signup.hive.io
* '''Hive Keychain (browser extension users will need):''' https://hive-keychain.com
* '''Hive-Engine (where CNOOBS lives):''' https://hive-engine.com
* '''Roadmap:''' see <code>roadmap_status.md</code> in the repo for current dev state.
* '''Deep technical context:''' see <code>CLAUDE.md</code> in the repo.